README.md, before:

UUIDv47 — UUIDv7-in / UUIDv4-out (SipHash‑masked timestamp)
===========================================================

`uuidv47` lets you store sortable UUIDv7 in your database while emitting a
UUIDv4‑looking façade at your API boundary. It XOR‑masks *only* the UUIDv7
timestamp field with a keyed SipHash‑2‑4 stream derived from the UUID’s own
random bits. The mapping is deterministic and exactly invertible.

- Header‑only C (C89) · zero deps
- Deterministic, invertible mapping (exact round‑trip)
- RFC‑compatible version/variant bits (v7 in DB, v4 on the wire)
- Key‑recovery resistant (SipHash‑2‑4, 128‑bit key)
- Full tests provided
- Optional PostgreSQL extension (UUID type + operators/opclasses)

------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of contents
-----------------
- Why
- Quick start (C)
- Public C API
- Specification
  - UUIDv7 bit layout
  - Façade mapping (v7 ↔ v4)
  - SipHash message derived from random
  - Invertibility
  - Collision analysis
- Security model
- Build, test, coverage
- PostgreSQL extension
  - Build & install
  - Tests
  - Gotchas & performance tips
- Integration tips
- Performance notes
- Benchmarks (C)
- Ports in other languages
- Production recommendations
- FAQ
- License

------------------------------------------------------------------

Why
---
- **DB‑friendly**: UUIDv7 is time‑ordered → better index locality & pagination.
- **Externally neutral**: The façade hides timing patterns and looks like v4 to clients/systems.
- **Secret safety**: Uses a PRF (SipHash‑2‑4). Non‑crypto hashes are not suitable when the key must not leak.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Quick start (C)
---------------
```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include "uuidv47.h"

int main(void){
  const char* s = "00000000-0000-7000-8000-000000000000";
  uuid128_t v7;
  if (!uuid_parse(s, &v7)) return 1;

  uuidv47_key_t key = { .k0 = 0x0123456789abcdefULL, .k1 = 0xfedcba9876543210ULL };

  uuid128_t facade = uuidv47_encode_v4facade(v7, key);
  uuid128_t back   = uuidv47_decode_v4facade(facade, key);

  char a[37], b[37], c[37];
  uuid_format(&v7, a);
  uuid_format(&facade, b);
  uuid_format(&back, c);

  printf("v7 (DB) : %s\n", a);
  printf("v4 (API): %s\n", b);
  printf("back    : %s\n", c);
}
```

Build & run with the provided Makefile:

```
make test
make coverage
sudo make install     # installs header into $(PREFIX)/include
```

------------------------------------------------------------------

Public C API
------------

```c
typedef struct { uint8_t  b[16]; } uuid128_t;
typedef struct { uint64_t k0, k1; } uuidv47_key_t;

uuid128_t uuidv47_encode_v4facade(uuid128_t v7, uuidv47_key_t key);
uuid128_t uuidv47_decode_v4facade(uuid128_t v4_facade, uuidv47_key_t key);

int  uuid_version(const uuid128_t* u);
void set_version(uuid128_t* u, int ver);
void set_variant_rfc4122(uuid128_t* u);

bool uuid_parse (const char* str, uuid128_t* out);
void uuid_format(const uuid128_t* u, char out[37]);
```

------------------------------------------------------------------

Specification
-------------

### UUIDv7 bit layout
- **ts_ms_be**: 48‑bit big‑endian timestamp
- **ver**: high nibble of byte 6 = 0x7 (v7) or 0x4 (façade)
- **rand_a**: 12 random bits
- **var**: RFC variant (0b10)
- **rand_b**: 62 random bits

### Façade mapping
- **Encode**: `ts48 ^ mask48(R)`, then set version = 4
- **Decode**: `encTS ^ mask48(R)`, then set version = 7
- Random bits remain unchanged.

### SipHash message
10 bytes derived from the v7 random field:
```
msg[0] = (byte6 & 0x0F)
msg[1] = byte7
msg[2] = (byte8 & 0x3F)
msg[3..9] = bytes9..15
```

### Invertibility
The mask is XOR with a keyed PRF → perfectly invertible when the key is known.

### Collision analysis
Mapping is injective; collisions reduce to duplicate randoms within the same ms.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Security model
--------------
- **Goal**: Secret key unrecoverable even with chosen inputs.
- **Achieved**: SipHash‑2‑4 is a keyed PRF.
- **Keys**: 128‑bit. Recommend deriving via HKDF.
- **Rotation**: Store a small key ID alongside UUIDs (out‑of‑band).

------------------------------------------------------------------

Build, test, coverage
---------------------
```
make test
make coverage
make debug
sudo make install
# optional microbench
make bench && ./bench
```

------------------------------------------------------------------

PostgreSQL extension
--------------------

This repo includes an optional Postgres extension that defines a `uuid47` base
type, casts to/from core `uuid`, operators, B‑tree/hash opclasses, and a BRIN
(minmax‑multi) distance support function.

### Build & install
```
# From repo root (uses PGXS via pg_config)
make pginstall
```

Enable in a database:
```sql
CREATE EXTENSION uuid47;          -- installs type and functions
-- (If you installed into a custom schema, add it to search_path.)
```

### Tests
Run the SQL test suite end‑to‑end:
```
make pgtest   PG_CONFIG=/opt/homebrew/opt/postgresql@17/bin/pg_config   PSQL="/opt/homebrew/opt/postgresql@17/bin/psql"   DBNAME=postgres
```

### Gotchas & performance tips
- **Use the native column type**: store `uuid47_generate()` into a `uuid47`
  column. Inserting into `uuid` triggers an assignment cast every row and can be
  ~2–3 µs/row slower.
- **Type alignment**: `uuid47` uses `ALIGNMENT = int4` (like core `uuid`) for
  better tuple formation speed.
- **Key GUC**: some transforms (e.g., façade output) require a session key:
  ```sql
  SET uuid47.key = '0011223344556677:8899aabbccddeeff';
  ```
  Parse happens once via a GUC assign hook and is cached per backend.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Integration tips
----------------

- Store only the UUIDv7, not the facade ID.
- Manage the secret through a Key Management Service (KMS).

**Frontend/client-facing entities**

→ Use **UUIDv47** with a B-Tree index. Users aren’t expected to persist this ID and can tolerate cache resets. Secure the secret with an HSM and inject it safely into the process.

**External service–facing entities**

→ If the service is **secure** (e.g., financial), provide **UUID7 (UUIDv47)**.

→ If the service is **not secure**, provide a **secondary ID of type UUIDv4** with a hashmap index.
  
If the master key leaks, it’s almost certain your consumer data and systems have leaked as well—which is ultimately a **legal problem**, not a technical one. Data leaks will cause far greater issues than the compromise of an ID master key, which can be rotated safely since only the frontend depends on it.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Performance notes
-----------------
- SipHash‑2‑4 on a 10‑byte message is extremely fast and allocation‑free.
- The provided implementation avoids per‑row GUC parsing and minimizes copies.
- Monotonic generator uses per‑backend state; ordering is stable within a session.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Benchmarks (C)
--------------

**Command:** `./bench` (2,000,000 iters, 1 warmup + 3 rounds)

**Example (Apple M‑series):**
```bash
iters=2000000, warmup=1, rounds=3
[warmup] 34.89 ns/op
[encode+decode] round 1: 33.80 ns/op, 29.6 Mops/s
[encode+decode] round 2: 38.16 ns/op, 26.2 Mops/s
[encode+decode] round 3: 33.33 ns/op, 30.0 Mops/s
[warmup] 14.83 ns/op
[siphash(10B)] round 1: 14.88 ns/op, 67.2 Mops/s
[siphash(10B)] round 2: 15.45 ns/op, 64.7 Mops/s
[siphash(10B)] round 3: 15.00 ns/op, 66.7 Mops/s
== best results ==
encode+decode : 33.00 ns/op (30.3 Mops/s)
siphash(10B)  : 14.00 ns/op (71.4 Mops/s)
```

What it measures
- `encode+decode`: full v7 → façade → v7 round‑trip.
- `siphash(10B)`: SipHash‑2‑4 on the 10‑byte mask message.

> Build with `-O3 -march=native` for best results.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Ports in other languages
------------------------
- **Go:** [n2p5/uuid47](https://github.com/n2p5/uuid47) — Go port of UUIDv47
- **JavaScript:** [sh1kxrv/node_uuidv47](https://github.com/sh1kxrv/node_uuidv47) — JavaScript port of UUIDv47 with native bindings
- **C#/.NET:** [taiseiue/UUIDv47Sharp](https://github.com/taiseiue/UUIDv47Sharp) - C#/.NET ecosystem port of UUIDv47
- **Ruby:** [sylph01/uuid47](https://github.com/sylph01/uuid47) - Ruby port of UUIDv47

------------------------------------------------------------------

FAQ
---
**Q: Why not xxHash with a secret?**  
A: Not a PRF; secret can leak. Use SipHash.

**Q: Is the façade indistinguishable from v4?**  
A: Version/variant bits are v4; variable bits are uniformly distributed under the PRF.

------------------------------------------------------------------

License
-------
MIT, Copyright (c) 2025 Stateless Limited

Commit message:

Add implications of duplicate randoms section to README

README.md, after:

UUIDv47 — UUIDv7-in / UUIDv4-out (SipHash‑masked timestamp)
===========================================================

`uuidv47` lets you store sortable UUIDv7 in your database while emitting a
UUIDv4‑looking façade at your API boundary. It XOR‑masks *only* the UUIDv7
timestamp field with a keyed SipHash‑2‑4 stream derived from the UUID’s own
random bits. The mapping is deterministic and exactly invertible.

- Header‑only C (C89) · zero deps
- Deterministic, invertible mapping (exact round‑trip)
- RFC‑compatible version/variant bits (v7 in DB, v4 on the wire)
- Key‑recovery resistant (SipHash‑2‑4, 128‑bit key)
- Full tests provided
- Optional PostgreSQL extension (UUID type + operators/opclasses)

------------------------------------------------------------------

Table of contents
-----------------
- Why
- Quick start (C)
- Public C API
- Specification
  - UUIDv7 bit layout
  - Façade mapping (v7 ↔ v4)
  - SipHash message derived from random
  - Invertibility
  - Collision analysis
- Security model
- Build, test, coverage
- PostgreSQL extension
  - Build & install
  - Tests
  - Gotchas & performance tips
- Integration tips
- Performance notes
- Benchmarks (C)
- Ports in other languages
- Production recommendations
- FAQ
- License

------------------------------------------------------------------

Why
---
- **DB‑friendly**: UUIDv7 is time‑ordered → better index locality & pagination.
- **Externally neutral**: The façade hides timing patterns and looks like v4 to clients/systems.
- **Secret safety**: Uses a PRF (SipHash‑2‑4). Non‑crypto hashes are not suitable when the key must not leak.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Quick start (C)
---------------
```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include "uuidv47.h"

int main(void){
  const char* s = "00000000-0000-7000-8000-000000000000";
  uuid128_t v7;
  if (!uuid_parse(s, &v7)) return 1;

  uuidv47_key_t key = { .k0 = 0x0123456789abcdefULL, .k1 = 0xfedcba9876543210ULL };

  uuid128_t facade = uuidv47_encode_v4facade(v7, key);
  uuid128_t back   = uuidv47_decode_v4facade(facade, key);

  char a[37], b[37], c[37];
  uuid_format(&v7, a);
  uuid_format(&facade, b);
  uuid_format(&back, c);

  printf("v7 (DB) : %s\n", a);
  printf("v4 (API): %s\n", b);
  printf("back    : %s\n", c);
}
```

Build & run with the provided Makefile:

```
make test
make coverage
sudo make install     # installs header into $(PREFIX)/include
```

------------------------------------------------------------------

Public C API
------------

```c
typedef struct { uint8_t  b[16]; } uuid128_t;
typedef struct { uint64_t k0, k1; } uuidv47_key_t;

uuid128_t uuidv47_encode_v4facade(uuid128_t v7, uuidv47_key_t key);
uuid128_t uuidv47_decode_v4facade(uuid128_t v4_facade, uuidv47_key_t key);

int  uuid_version(const uuid128_t* u);
void set_version(uuid128_t* u, int ver);
void set_variant_rfc4122(uuid128_t* u);

bool uuid_parse (const char* str, uuid128_t* out);
void uuid_format(const uuid128_t* u, char out[37]);
```

------------------------------------------------------------------

Specification
-------------

### UUIDv7 bit layout
- **ts_ms_be**: 48‑bit big‑endian timestamp
- **ver**: high nibble of byte 6 = 0x7 (v7) or 0x4 (façade)
- **rand_a**: 12 random bits
- **var**: RFC variant (0b10)
- **rand_b**: 62 random bits

### Façade mapping
- **Encode**: `ts48 ^ mask48(R)`, then set version = 4
- **Decode**: `encTS ^ mask48(R)`, then set version = 7
- Random bits remain unchanged.

### SipHash message
10 bytes derived from the v7 random field:
```
msg[0] = (byte6 & 0x0F)
msg[1] = byte7
msg[2] = (byte8 & 0x3F)
msg[3..9] = bytes9..15
```

### Invertibility
The mask is XOR with a keyed PRF → perfectly invertible when the key is known.

### Collision analysis
Mapping is injective; collisions reduce to duplicate randoms within the same ms.

### Implications of Duplicate Randoms for Differing Timestamps
If two IDs have the same randoms, but different timestamps, then XORing the facade IDs will reveal the XOR of the timestamps, because the mask will cancel out. This does not reveal the key, only an upper bound on the duration between when the IDs were generated. For a 1% chance of finding 2 matching randoms, using the birthday problem approximation, ~20 billion IDs would need to be generated, or ~60 billion for a 10% chance. For an attacker trying to reveal information about a chosen target ID, they would need to generate on average 2^74 IDs, which is infeasible.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Security model
--------------
- **Goal**: Secret key unrecoverable even with chosen inputs.
- **Achieved**: SipHash‑2‑4 is a keyed PRF.
- **Keys**: 128‑bit. Recommend deriving via HKDF.
- **Rotation**: Store a small key ID alongside UUIDs (out‑of‑band).

------------------------------------------------------------------

Build, test, coverage
---------------------
```
make test
make coverage
make debug
sudo make install
# optional microbench
make bench && ./bench
```

------------------------------------------------------------------

PostgreSQL extension
--------------------

This repo includes an optional Postgres extension that defines a `uuid47` base
type, casts to/from core `uuid`, operators, B‑tree/hash opclasses, and a BRIN
(minmax‑multi) distance support function.

### Build & install
```
# From repo root (uses PGXS via pg_config)
make pginstall
```

Enable in a database:
```sql
CREATE EXTENSION uuid47;          -- installs type and functions
-- (If you installed into a custom schema, add it to search_path.)
```

### Tests
Run the SQL test suite end‑to‑end:
```
make pgtest   PG_CONFIG=/opt/homebrew/opt/postgresql@17/bin/pg_config   PSQL="/opt/homebrew/opt/postgresql@17/bin/psql"   DBNAME=postgres
```

### Gotchas & performance tips
- **Use the native column type**: store `uuid47_generate()` into a `uuid47`
  column. Inserting into `uuid` triggers an assignment cast every row and can be
  ~2–3 µs/row slower.
- **Type alignment**: `uuid47` uses `ALIGNMENT = int4` (like core `uuid`) for
  better tuple formation speed.
- **Key GUC**: some transforms (e.g., façade output) require a session key:
  ```sql
  SET uuid47.key = '0011223344556677:8899aabbccddeeff';
  ```
  Parse happens once via a GUC assign hook and is cached per backend.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Integration tips
----------------

- Store only the UUIDv7, not the facade ID.
- Manage the secret through a Key Management Service (KMS).

**Frontend/client-facing entities**

→ Use **UUIDv47** with a B-Tree index. Users aren’t expected to persist this ID and can tolerate cache resets. Secure the secret with an HSM and inject it safely into the process.

**External service–facing entities**

→ If the service is **secure** (e.g., financial), provide **UUID7 (UUIDv47)**.

→ If the service is **not secure**, provide a **secondary ID of type UUIDv4** with a hashmap index.
  
If the master key leaks, it’s almost certain your consumer data and systems have leaked as well—which is ultimately a **legal problem**, not a technical one. Data leaks will cause far greater issues than the compromise of an ID master key, which can be rotated safely since only the frontend depends on it.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Performance notes
-----------------
- SipHash‑2‑4 on a 10‑byte message is extremely fast and allocation‑free.
- The provided implementation avoids per‑row GUC parsing and minimizes copies.
- Monotonic generator uses per‑backend state; ordering is stable within a session.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Benchmarks (C)
--------------

**Command:** `./bench` (2,000,000 iters, 1 warmup + 3 rounds)

**Example (Apple M‑series):**
```bash
iters=2000000, warmup=1, rounds=3
[warmup] 34.89 ns/op
[encode+decode] round 1: 33.80 ns/op, 29.6 Mops/s
[encode+decode] round 2: 38.16 ns/op, 26.2 Mops/s
[encode+decode] round 3: 33.33 ns/op, 30.0 Mops/s
[warmup] 14.83 ns/op
[siphash(10B)] round 1: 14.88 ns/op, 67.2 Mops/s
[siphash(10B)] round 2: 15.45 ns/op, 64.7 Mops/s
[siphash(10B)] round 3: 15.00 ns/op, 66.7 Mops/s
== best results ==
encode+decode : 33.00 ns/op (30.3 Mops/s)
siphash(10B)  : 14.00 ns/op (71.4 Mops/s)
```

What it measures
- `encode+decode`: full v7 → façade → v7 round‑trip.
- `siphash(10B)`: SipHash‑2‑4 on the 10‑byte mask message.

> Build with `-O3 -march=native` for best results.

------------------------------------------------------------------

Ports in other languages
------------------------
- **Go:** [n2p5/uuid47](https://github.com/n2p5/uuid47) — Go port of UUIDv47
- **JavaScript:** [sh1kxrv/node_uuidv47](https://github.com/sh1kxrv/node_uuidv47) — JavaScript port of UUIDv47 with native bindings
- **C#/.NET:** [taiseiue/UUIDv47Sharp](https://github.com/taiseiue/UUIDv47Sharp) - C#/.NET ecosystem port of UUIDv47
- **Ruby:** [sylph01/uuid47](https://github.com/sylph01/uuid47) - Ruby port of UUIDv47

------------------------------------------------------------------

FAQ
---
**Q: Why not xxHash with a secret?**  
A: Not a PRF; secret can leak. Use SipHash.

**Q: Is the façade indistinguishable from v4?**  
A: Version/variant bits are v4; variable bits are uniformly distributed under the PRF.

------------------------------------------------------------------

License
-------
MIT, Copyright (c) 2025 Stateless Limited
